
Over the past few weeks, an increasing number of otolaryn-
gologists reported sudden anosmia or hyposmia as concur-
rent symptoms of COVID-19 infection. In these patients, 
the diagnosis of COVID-19 could be missed, because 
these symptoms were not known to be specific. As a result, 
the patients were not isolated and the spread of the virus 

continued. In this context, the COVID-19 Task Force of 
the YO-IFOS has conducted this study to investigate the 
prevalence and the short-term evolution of both olfactory 
and gustatory disorders.

Based on the National Health and Nutrition Examina-
tion Survey questions, our results support that olfactory 
and gustatory dysfunctions are both prevalent in patients 
with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 infection. Thus, 85.6% 
of patients reported olfactory dysfunction; 79.6% of them 

Table 3  Short version of questionnaire of olfactory disorders-negative statements of patient

sQOD-NS is a seven-item patient-reported outcome questionnaire including social, eating, annoyance, and anxiety questions. Each item is rated 
on a scale of 0–3, with higher scores reflecting better olfactory-specific QOL. The total score ranges from 0 (severe impact on QoL) to 21 (no 
impact on QoL) [9]. The item and total scores of sQOD-NS significantly differ between patients with anosmia at the time of the assessment, and 
those with hyposmia or without olfactory dysfunction (*p = 0.001)
LS loss of smell, sQOD-NS Short version of Questionnaire of Olfactory Disorders-Negative Statements

Short version QOD-NS items Anosmia Hyposmia No LS

Changes in my sense of smell isolate me socially 1.68 ± 0.91* 2.34 ± 0.75 2.53 ± 0.65
The problems with my sense of smell have a negative impact on my daily social activities 1.37 ± 0.93* 2.11 ± 0.84 2.56 ± 0.69
The problems with my sense of smell make me more irritable 1.46 ± 0.92* 2.21 ± 0.82 2.64 ± 0.59
Because of the problems with my sense of smell, I eat out less 1.30 ± 1.09* 2.12 ± 0.99 2.31 ± 1.04
Because of the problems with my sense of smell, I eat less than before (loss of appetite) 1.00 ± 0.88* 1.59 ± 0.97 2.36 ± 0.90
Because of the problems with my sense of smell, I have to make more effort to relax 1.67 ± 0.88* 2.91 ± 0.79 2.61 ± 0.60
I’m afraid I’ll never be able to get used to the problems with my sense of smell. 0.73 ± 0.86* 1.90 ± 1.06 2.06 ± 1.19
Short version QOD-NOS total score 9.15 ± 4.60* 14.44 ± 4.59 13.60 ± 8.17

Fig. 4  Therapeutic strategies for COVID-19 infection (a) and olfac-
tory dysfunction (b)



2258 European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology (2020) 277:2251–2261

1 3

having anosmia. Interestingly, many profiles of patients have 
been identified. First, our data showed that 79.7% of patients 
without nasal obstruction or rhinorrhea reported hyposmia 
or anosmia, supporting the role of otolaryngologists as the 
first-line physicians for some COVID-19 patients. Second, 
the olfactory dysfunction may appear before, during, or after 
the general symptoms, with the occurrence of fever being 
associated with the olfactory dysfunction. There have been 
few studies on the occurrence of olfactory and gustatory dys-
functions in Asia, since only one study reported hyposmia as 
a symptom of the COVID-19 infection [12]. In the study of 
Mao et al., patients with peripheral nervous system symp-
toms attributed to COVID-19 infection, the most common 
the most common complaints were hypogeusia (5.6%) and 
hyposmia (5.1%) [12]. According to the data of the present 
study, the prevalence of olfactory and gustatory dysfunc-
tion is substantially higher in European COVID-19 patients. 
In addition to the high prevalence, physicians must keep in 
mind that olfactory disorder may appear before the rest of 
the complaints in 11.8% of cases, yielding the symptoms 
important for the early detection of the disease.

One of the most important questions from the otolaryn-
gologists concerned the recovery of olfactory and gustatory 
functions. Although our results are still preliminary, it seems 
that, at least, 25.5% of patients recovered both olfactory and 
gustatory functions throughout the 2 weeks after the resolu-
tion of general symptoms. Considering the time to get a sig-
nificant reduction of the viral load [10], we have estimated 
that 56% of patients have persistent olfactory dysfunction 
over the days following the resolution of the COVID-19 gen-
eral clinical manifestations. In the same vein, some patients 
seemed to recover olfaction, but not taste, and vice versa. 
Naturally, there are short-term observations and it is rea-
sonable to think that a large number of these patients will 
recover the olfactory or gustatory functions over the weeks 
following the disease resolution. To summarize, the present 
study clearly supports the recent declarations of many physi-
cians from South Korea, Iran, Germany, Italy, Spain, France, 
Belgium, UK, and US that olfactory and gustatory functions 
may be impaired in COVID-19 patients.

The pathophysiological mechanisms leading to the olfac-
tory and gustatory dysfunctions in the COVID-19 infection 
are still unknown. Coronavirus has already been identified as 
a family of viruses that may be associated with anosmia [6]. 
In 2007, Suzuki et al. demonstrated that coronavirus may be 
detected in the nasal discharge of patients with olfactory dys-
function. Moreover, they observed that some patients with 
normal acoustic rhinometry did not recover their olfaction, 
suggesting that nasal inflammation and related obstruction 
were not the only etiological factors underlying the olfactory 
dysfunction in viral infection.

The ability of human coronavirus to invade the olfac-
tory bulb and, therefore, the central nervous system, is most 

likely a future research path for improving the knowledge 
about the clinical presentation of patients. From a biomo-
lecular standpoint, viruses could infect peripheral neurons, 
using the cell machinery of active transport to access the 
central nervous system [13]. Thus, for the SARS-CoV 
receptor (human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), it has 
been demonstrated on transgenic mice that SARS-CoV 
may enter the brain through the olfactory bulb, leading to 
rapid transneuronal spread [14]. Interestingly, authors dem-
onstrated that the virus antigen was first detected 60–66 h 
post-infection and was most abundant in the olfactory bulb. 
Regions of the cortex (piriform and infralimbic cortices), 
basal ganglia (ventral pallidum and lateral preoptic regions), 
and midbrain (dorsal raphe) were also strongly infected after 
the virus had spread [14]; these regions are connected with 
the olfactory bulb. The rapid spread of SARS-CoV in the 
brain was also associated with significant neuronal death. 
In humans, autopsy samples from eight patients with SARS 
revealed the presence of SARS-CoV in brain samples by 
immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and real-time 
RT-PCR [15]. It is currently suspected that the neuroinvasive 
potential of SARS-CoV2 plays a key role in the respira-
tory failure of COVID-19 patients [16]. Medical imaging 
and neuropathology will certainly play an important rule to 
detect abnormalities in olfactory bulb, cranial nerves, and 
brain of COVID-19 patients.

The otolaryngological symptoms in our European 
cohort were particularly prevalent compared with the Asian 
cohorts. In their clinical series of 99 patients, Chen et al. 
reported four patients with rhinorrhea (4%) [17]. Then, 
Guan et al. reported a prevalence of nasal obstruction in 
5% of patients in a cohort of 1099 patients [18]. The lack 
of otolaryngological complaints in Asian papers, e.g., nasal 
obstruction, rhinorrhea, and olfactory and gustatory dys-
functions, raises many questions. Either they did not assess 
the ENT complaints, or the Chinese patients had a few ENT 
complaints. The second hypothesis may be likely regard-
ing previous studies. Benvenuto et al. have recently com-
pared the complete genomes of 15 virus sequences from 
patients treated in different regions of China with other 
coronaviruses [19]. Interestingly, they observed mutations 
of surface proteins (spike-S-protein and nucleocapsid-N-
protein), conferring stability to the viral particle. Such muta-
tions could be clinically relevant, because the viral spike 
protein is responsible for virus entry into the cell, whereas 
the N-protein plays a pivotal role in the virus transcription 
and assembly efficiency. Previously, Chan et al. determined 
five virus sequences from patients traveling in Wuhan at the 
end of December 2019. This study reported identities, but 
less than 68%, with the SARS-related coronaviruses in spe-
cific domains. Particularly, the external subdomain region 
of receptor-binding domain of the S-protein only presents 
39% identity, and Chan et al. propose that it might affect 



2259European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology (2020) 277:2251–2261 

1 3

the choice of human receptor and, therefore, the biological 
behaviour of this virus [20]. The affinity of some viruses 
for some tissues and individuals constitutes another area 
to investigate and explain the potential clinical differences 
between patients from different world regions. Recent stud-
ies suggested that the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 
(ACE2), which is the receptor of SARS-CoV-2, could be 
specific to certain populations. Li et al. demonstrated that 
some ACE2 variants could reduce the association between 
human ACE2 and SARS-CoV S-protein [21]. In other words, 
the expression level of ACE2 in different tissues might be 
critical for the susceptibility, symptoms, and outcomes of 
COVID-19 infection [21]. Moreover, the comparison of the 
15 expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) variants of the 
ACE2 gene suggested that there will be a lot of ACE2 poly-
morphisms and ACE2 expression levels between Asian and 
European populations [22]. According to these studies, it is 
conceivable that the diversity of ACE2 expression pattern 
in Asian and European populations could be an important 
track that needs further investigation.

Moreover, regarding our results, future studies have to 
explore the potential gender differences in the development 
of anosmia. The highest susceptibility of females to develop 
olfactory and gustatory dysfunctions would be related to the 
gender-related differences in the inflammatory reaction pro-
cess [23].

The present study has several limitations. First, our 
patients did not benefit from specific examinations for 
olfactory and gustatory functions, including psychophysi-
cal tests or electrophysiological methods [24, 25]. The use 
of objective approaches makes sense for investigating both 
gustatory and olfactory functions in COVID-19 patients, and 
to avoid the confusion related to the retro-olfaction. These 
approaches would provide many responses for patients 
who may recover olfaction, but not taste, and vice versa. 
Second, our patient sample consisted of young and mild-
to-moderate COVID-19 patients with little comorbidities. 
They may be not representative of the infected population. 
However, it seems ethically difficult to investigate olfaction 
and gustatory function in patients in life-threatening condi-
tion, such as patients in intensive-care units. Note that in 
this study, the majority of included patients were identified 
from hospital laboratory results. However, many infected 
physicians completed the study, and, therefore, it remains 
possible that many infected physicians participated to the 
study, because they suffered from olfactory dysfunction, 
although the authors have been particularly vigilant to this 
potential bias. Third, the lack of consistent follow-up of our 
patients limits us from inquiring into the recovery time of 
olfactory and gustatory functions, and, therefore, the rate 
of permanent anosmia or ageusia. Fourth, it seems difficult 
to identify the potential negative impact of nasal and oral 
corticosteroids on the clinical course of the disease; these 

treatments are usually used for anosmia or in common nasal 
complaints. In the absence of such data, the precautionary 
principle may prevail and, according to the guidelines of the 
French Society of Otolaryngology, patients must avoid corti-
costeroids for the treatment of the COVID-19 infection. All 
of these weaknesses should be considered in future studies 
to investigate and characterize the olfactory and gustatory 
functions in COVID-19 patients.
