
Three ethics committees approved the current study protocol 
(HAP2020-011; CHUSP20032020; EpiCURA-2020-2303). 
Patients were invited to participate and the informed consent 
was obtained.

Subjects and setting

The clinical data of patients with laboratory-confirmed 
COVID-19 infection have been collected from four Belgian 
Hospitals (CHU Saint-Pierre, Brussels; CHU Ambroise 
Paré, Mons; EpiCURA, Baudour; EpiCURA, Ath), and 
University of Mons (Belgium). In addition to these ones, 
many other patients, infected physicians and nurses have 
been voluntarily enrolled in the study from the following 
hospitals: Foch Hospital (Paris, France); Ambroise Paré 

Hospital (AP-HP, Paris), CHU Ambroise Paré (Mons, Bel-
gium), Hospital Universitario Donostia (Donostia, Spain); 
Hospital Universitario Santiago de Compostela (Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain); Morgagni Pierantoni Hospital 
(Forli, Italy), Department of Neuroscience, Audiology Unit 
(Padova University, Treviso, Italy), and Medical Depart-
ments of the Università degli Studi della Campania ‘Luigi 
Vanvitelli’ (Naples, Italy).

The following inclusion criteria have been considered: 
adult (> 18 years old); laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 
infection (reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, 
RT-PCR); native speaker patients, and patients clinically 
able to fulfill the questionnaire. The following exclusion 
criteria have been considered: patients with olfactory or 
gustatory dysfunctions before the epidemic; patients with-
out a laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 infection diagnosis; 
patients who were in the intensive-care unit at the time 
of the study (due to their health status). Thus, we mainly 
included mild-to-moderate COVID-19 patients, defined as 
patients without need of intensive cares. Since we focused 
on the prevalence of olfactory and gustatory disorders, 
clinical presentation was not considered in as inclusion 
criteria.

Clinical outcomes

Clinical data have been prospectively collected during the 
ear, nose, and throat (ENT) consultation; in the patient’s 
room; or over the phone for house-bound patients or infected 
health professionals. The data were also collected through an 
online form for house-bound patients. The online question-
naire was created with Professional Survey Monkey (San 
Mateo, CA, USA), so that each participant could complete 
the survey only once.

The selection of the relevant epidemiological and 
clinical features composing the questionnaire was car-
ried out by the COVID-19 Task Force of YO-IFOS, which 
includes otolaryngologists from North America, Europe, 
and Asia [8]. Exper ts analyzed the epidemiological 
publications of the current and the previous coronavi-
rus infections, including SRAS-CoV-1 (2002); Middle-
East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus infection 
(MERS-CoV, 2012), and the COVID-19 infection. From 
the literature, ten experts (JRL, SS, MH, JHS, PL, TA, 
LD, FEA, CCH, and CMCE) developed the question-
naire, which consisted of four general questions (age, sex, 
ethnicity, and date of diagnosis); three general clinical 
questions (comorbidities, general, and ENT symptoms 
associated with COVID-19 infection); seven questions 
about olfactory function; four questions investigating 



2253European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology (2020) 277:2251–2261 

1 3

gustatory function; and one question about the treatment 
of the COVID-19 infection. All patients were asked to 
complete the short version of the Questionnaire of Olfac-
tory Disorders-Negative Statements (sQOD-NS) [9]. The 
questionnaire has been translated into Spanish, Italian, 
and English by two native speaker otolaryngologists for 
each language.

Olfactory and gustatory outcomes

The occurrence of anosmia or hyposmia has been identified 
in the questionnaire. The impact of olfactory dysfunction 
on the quality of life (QoL) of patients has been assessed 
through the validated sQOD-NS (Appendix 1) [9]. This is a 
seven-item patient-reported outcome questionnaire includ-
ing social, eating, annoyance, and anxiety questions. Each 
item is rated on a scale of 0–3, with higher scores reflecting 
better olfactory-specific QoL. The total score ranges from 0 
(severe impact on QoL) to 21 (no impact on QoL) [9]. The 
rest of the olfactory and gustatory questions were based on 
the smell and taste component of the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey [10]. This population survey 
was implemented by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention to continuously monitor the health of adult citi-
zens in the United States through a nationally representa-
tive sample of 5000 persons yearly [10]. The questions 
have been chosen to characterize the variation, timing, and 
associated symptoms of both olfactory and gustatory dys-
functions, and, therefore, they suggest a potential etiology. 
Note that we assessed the mean recovery time of olfaction 
through four defined propositions: 1–4  days; 5–8  days; 
9–14 days; and > 15 days.

Referring to the studies that have demonstrated that the 
viral load was significantly decreased after 14 days [11], 
we assessed the short-term olfaction non-recovery rate on 
patients exhibiting double criteria: an onset of the infec-
tion > 14 days before the assessment and the lack of general 
symptoms at the time of the evaluation.

Statistical methods

Statistical Package for the Social Sciences for Windows 
(SPSS version 22,0; IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA) was 
used to perform the statistical analyses. The potential 
associations between epidemiological, clinical and olfac-
tory and gustatory outcomes have been assessed through 
cross-tab generation between two variables (binary or 
categorical variables) and Chi-square test. Incomplete 
responses were excluded from analysis. The differences 
in sQOD-NS scores between patients regarding the olfac-
tory dysfunction were made through the Kruskal–Wallis 
test. A level of p < 0.05 was used to determine statistical 
significance.
