
Since the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in December 2019
originating in China, it has spread globally, although the

magnitude of involvement and disease severity vary across
regions. The existence of this virus has been concurrent with
other respiratory viruses, such as the influenza virus, making

it difficult to distinguish its symptoms from other viruses that
cause upper respiratory tract infection. Given the non-
specific nature of the presentation, definitive diagnosis of

COVID-19 mostly relies on tests like RT-PCR, although
characteristic features on high-resolution computed tomog-
raphy (CT) scans have also been described.

4,10
Investigations

such as CT scan and PCR are a burden on most healthcare

economies; ordering them for every person presenting with
non-specific symptoms like cough and fever (which may, in
fact, be indicative of numerous other self-limiting/mild res-

piratory infections) is not economically viable. Hence, iden-
tifying clinical symptoms that distinguish COVID-19 from
other closely related upper respiratory infections is key to

identifying the patients that truly need these expensive in-
vestigations.

10e12

Mao et al.
37

initially reported anosmia in COVID-19, and

since then, many researchers have started reporting new-onset
OGD in COVID-19.

38,39
The consistency in the literature led

to their inclusion on the CDC’s list of COVID-19 symptoms
and the American Academy of Otolaryngology e Head and
Neck Surgery’s (AAO-HNS) publication of the Anosmia
Reporting Tool for Clinicians.

40,41
A preliminary analysis of
237 submissions to this platform reported a 73% prevalence
of anosmia in COVID-19.

40
This encouraged physicians and

researchers to publish studies with evidence of OGD, and

sufficient clinical data became available to exclusively
attribute these symptoms to SARS-CoV-2. An earlier meta-
analysis

42
calculated the prevalence of olfactory (53%) and

gustatory dysfunction (44%), but the results were limited by
a small sample size. Our study included almost double the
number of patients and found a higher prevalence than the

previously conducted review. We believe that our results
strengthen Bidkar et al.’s

43
and Marchese et al.’s

44
opinion

that OGD should be used as a screening tool for COVID-19
and that objective chemosensory testing for these symptoms

should be performed for all suspects. The use of validated
tools (e.g. the COVID-19 Anosmia Reporting Tool) and
chemosensory tests for detecting olfactory dysfunction

showed a significantly higher prevalence previously.
42

The
subgroup analysis conducted in our study also showed an
increased prevalence in the ‘validated tools group’ (61%)

compared to the ‘non-validated tools group’ (57%). This
implies that the true prevalence of OGD can be more
reliably calculated using an objective assessment as

compared to a subjective one. Sensitivity analysis run by
excluding low power studies also showed a 3% increase in
the prevalence of gustatory dysfunction, suggesting that the
pooled prevalence calculated in this meta-analysis may, in

fact, be an underestimation.
A brief review of neuroanatomy and physiology is

important to understand the pathogenic mechanisms that



Taste and Smell Dysfunction in COVID-19182
have been reported in the literature. Cranial nerves VII, IX,
and X are involved in taste perception and cranial nerve I

carries olfactory sensation.
45e47

Their peripheral parts
(receptors and afferent nerves) are responsible for
transmitting these sensations, while their nuclei and central

connections are responsible for the relay of impulses to the
brain’s gustatory and olfactory centres.

48,49
Both peripheral

and central nervous systems are believed to be affected by

SARS-CoV-2.
50

Central damage is due to its neuro-
invasive potential; retrograde travel through olfactory
bulbs has been demonstrated in mice and is also thought to
occur in humans.

51e54
Neurons and glial cells have also been

shown to express the key receptor of this virus, i.e. the ACE-2
receptor.

55
Lastly, SARS-CoV-2 has also been detected in

cerebrospinal fluid in humans, thus strengthening the virus’s

neurotropic potential.
52

On the other hand, the peripheral
damage hypothesis is based on evidence that ACE-2 re-
ceptors are present on olfactory as well as glossal mucosa.

56

Interestingly, tongue mucosa is shown to express these
receptors in higher quantities compared to the adjoining
oral cavity mucosa (e.g. buccal and gingival mucosa).

56

Considering the available literature and the detailed review

of the articles included in our study, the authors believe
that both mechanisms might play at least some role, but
evidence to suggest a predominance of one over the other

is lacking. Additionally, SARS-CoV-2 binds to the sialic
acid receptor. Sialic acid is an integral component of saliva
that is involved in the prevention of enzymatic degradation

of glycoproteins that convey gustatory molecules inside the
taste pores. Hence, by binding to the sialic acid receptor,
SARS-CoV-2 might increase the gustatory threshold.

57,58

OGD may occur simultaneously without the perceived
dominance of any one symptom. In fact, it is believed that
taste disorders are unlikely to exist in isolation.

59
We found a

high prevalence of OGD in our study, with more than half

the patients reporting some level of smell and taste
dysfunction. The levels of dysfunction ranged from
hyposmia/hypogeusia and dysosmia/dysgeusia to anosmia/

ageusia; hence, any of the aforementioned combinations
can be found. This variability may be reflective of a
subjective difference rather than an objective one, since

most studies did not use validated tools or objective testing
to report these symptoms. Nevertheless, given such a high
prevalence of at least some level of dysfunction, the

authors suggest the inclusion of olfactory and gustatory
manifestations as criteria for ordering expensive and time-
consuming investigations like RT-PCR. This is especially
important in developing countries with limited infrastructure

and resources. Some scientists have also advocated the
exclusive use of taste disorders as a screening tool because
some level of olfactory dysfunction can be seen in other in-

fections such as the common flu.
60

However, we believe that
isolated gustatory dysfunction is hard to find in COVID-19
patients and that a strict criterion like this will under-

evaluate the burden of this disease.
Another point of clinical significance that establishes the

prevalence of OGD as an important measure is its associa-
tion with a better COVID-19 prognosis.

53,61,62
Studies have

reported that patients presenting with smell and taste
dysfunction had less severe symptoms and were less likely
to require hospitalisation through the course of their

illness. Patients with OGD were less likely to need intensive
care unit admission and mechanical ventilation, and death
was a less frequent outcome.

63
The pathogenesis of this

association lies in the fact that patients with robust
immune systems release cytokines and create a strong
inflammatory response when exposed to a virus. This, in

turn, leads to the degeneration/apoptosis of olfactory
neurons, causing smell dysfunction. In contrast, patients
who have a weak immune system are unable to create such

a strong response, sparing the nasal mucosa.
64

The authors feel the need to acknowledge some limita-
tions encountered while deducing results from this study.
First, the pooled sample size is small, and the individual

studies are limited to certain geographical areas. Hence, the
included studies do not reflect the OGD distribution in
COVID-19 patients from every area of the world. Second,

objective chemosensory testing and validated tools to detect
OGD were not employed by all studies included in our re-
view. These symptoms were described, reported, and

explained as per the affected patients’ subjective perception;
hence, there is a high likelihood of underestimation of the
true disease prevalence. Additionally, clinicians’ increasing
awareness of these symptoms may have led to more frequent

inquiry regarding these symptoms, thus risking over-
estimation. Moreover, many studies were retrospective in
nature; thus, the possibility of recall bias cannot be ignored.

Lastly, although we performed sensitivity and subgroup
analyses in our study, doing so did not significantly decrease
the studies’ overall heterogeneity (I2). Possible reasons can be

the varied geographical locations and differences in study
designs and methods of detecting OGD. The strength of this
meta-analysis lies in the large sample size and the recom-

mendations/implications for clinical practice based on our
results.
