
We conducted our systematic review and meta-analysis in
keeping with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic

Reviews and Meta-Analyses Protocol (PRISMA-P). All
included studies were searched systematically. Our search
identified a total of 25 studies, but only 17 could be included
in the meta-analysis because of a difference in the reported

outcome measures; our study used weighted summary pro-
portion (pooled prevalence) as the main outcome measure.
Hence, only descriptive data from the remaining eight studies

are included.

Data sources and search strategy

We searched five databases, namely PubMed, Scopus,
Cochrane Library, Web of Science, and Google Scholar, for
our study. Our search strategy included a combination of

keywords and medical subject headings (MeSH), including
some of the following: ‘covid*’, OR ‘corona*’, OR ‘Wuhan
coronavirus’, OR ‘COVID-19’, OR ‘novel coronavirus’, OR

‘2019-nCoV’, OR ‘coronavirus’, OR ‘SARS-CoV-2’, OR
‘SARS-2’ OR ‘severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2’ AND ‘olfactory dysfunction’, OR ‘gustatory dysfunction’,

OR ‘Anosmia’, OR ‘Ageusia’. The complete search strategy
for PubMed is provided in Supplementary Files.

Study selection and data extraction

Two authors (A. S. and S. A.) independently evaluated the

search results. After removing duplicates, they identified the
studies on the basis of the inclusion and exclusion criteria, and
help was sought from a third author (MASC) if any confusion

regarding inclusion arose. The authors of the articles were not
contacted about the papers’ verifiability because these articles
had already been published in peer-reviewed journals. Unre-
viewed materials were excluded from the analysis; therefore,

the authors felt no need to contact the investigators. For the
systematic review, the following data were searched, extracted,
and analysed: name of the study, publication month and year,

sample size, study design, COVID-19-associated OGD symp-
toms and their prevalence, and the presence of any other
neurological clinical features. Literature and records were

managed using Endnote X9 software. The study selection
process is illustrated in PRISMA (Figure 1).

Inclusion/exclusion criteria

Observational studies (cross-sectional, cohort, and casee
control) with either suspected or confirmed cases of COVID-
19 that reported prevalence of olfactory or gustatory

dysfunction were included. This dysfunction ranged from a
complete loss (anosmia/ageusia) to partial loss (hyposmia/

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/


Taste and Smell Dysfunction in COVID-19176
hypogeusia) or alteration (dysosmia/dysgeusia) of these sen-
sations. Studies in languages other than English, case reports,

case series, letters to editors, and editorials were excluded.

Quality assessment

The risk of bias in individual studies was assessed by two

authors (S. A. and A. S.) using the NewcastleeOttawa Scale
(NOS). The NOS evaluates three quality parameters (selec-
tion, comparability, and outcome) divided across further

items, depending on the type of study. These tables are
provided as Supplementary Files: Annexures A and B.

Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed using Medcalc Sta-
tistical Software version 19.2.1 (MedCalc Software Ltd). The
weighted summary proportion (prevalence) was calculated

using a random-effect model because we expected to find
heterogeneity across studies. Forest plots were generated to
show the pooled prevalence of OGD with a 95% confidence

interval (CI).

Assessment of heterogeneity

Heterogeneity across studies was evaluated using Hig-
gins I

2
, and a value of less than 50% for I

2
was considered
Figure 1: PRISMA flow diagram
acceptable. Egger’s test and a visual inspection of the
funnel plot were conducted to evaluate the publication

bias. A p value of less than 0.05 was considered significant
in all cases. We intended to run a subgroup analysis in case
significant heterogeneity was found between studies. The

subgroup analysis would categorise studies into two
groups based on the use or lack of validated instruments
(validated questionnaires and chemosensory tests) to re-

cord OGD. Due to significant heterogeneity, a subgroup
analysis was eventually performed for olfactory dysfunc-
tion, but sensitivity analysis had to be performed for the
prevalence of gustatory dysfunction, as there was an

insufficient number of studies that used validated measures
to detect taste sensation.
